# Networking tutorial

-----
[home](README.md) ~ [geek](geekcode.md) ~ [org](orgmode.md) ~ [credo](credo.md) ~ [arcana](arcana.md) ~ [networks](networking.md) ~ [blog](blogroll.md)

-----

Centuries ago, John Milton wrote, \"I cannot praise a fugitive and
cloistered virtue,\" referring, at least in part, to those who keep
their intelligence to themselves. Without some form of communication --
without manifesting that intelligence in word or deed -- there is
generally no evidence of intelligence or intelligent life. Our knowledge
must create ripples in space and time if it is to be shared, and it must
be shared to benefit others.

For this reason, we create networks, which might be defined as
\"channels of sharing\". All virtue and all goodness is valued only in
sharing, whether by having mercy on another person or communicating the
answer to life, the universe, and everything. Only by sharing do we come
to the notice of others, and only with the help of others do we share
the load of living.

## Channels of sharing are complicated {#org464c4fe}

Sharing involves risk. Will the other person understand? Will they
accept what I\'ve shared, or turn against me? Will they appreciate what
I have shared, or judge me harshly? All communication involves the risks
of misunderstanding, judgement, and ridicule. We must choose carefully
when sharing information, tools, knowledge -- even compassion, love,
loyalty, and devotion. In a way, that\'s one of the \"equations\" of
living in a society, although public social media platforms have made
that more, er, interesting.

Often we segregate our sharing based on some measurable characteristic.
For example, we share with people of our own race, gender, color, or
national origin, but not with the \"others\". And we share in different
ways with different social groups. In fact, you might say that the
average person has as many personalities as there are groups of people
whose opinions they care about: we are one person at home, another at
the office, still another on the Internet, and yet another when we\'re
golfing, as examples. Each of these channels can have different rules,
mores, idioms, dialects, and vocabulary.

As we grow up, we learn to be *one* self, sharing with everyone in very
much the same way, restricting only *what* we share, not *how* we share
it. You begin to deeply understand the basics of human communication. If
you\'re serious about it, you begin to try to normalise your messaging
to include less moody prejudice and more honest opinion, modulated only
by personal privacy.

Thus it has been with computer networks. For a very long time, there
were at least as many network protocols -- *selves* -- as there were
brands and styles of computers. Different methods were needed to share
information from one system to another, sometimes even involving
specially-crafted physical interface cables to handle the translation.

Eventually, though, computer networks began to gravitate toward a
standard approach, \"one self to rule them all\", as it were. This
singular personality is known as TCP/IP. Learning how the TCP/IP
protocols work will serve you well in understanding, designing, and
debugging computer networks.

Let\'s get started.

## Adversarial beginnings {#org4d68ba6}

If you\'re going to learn a new language, it\'s probably important to
get an idea of the culture. After all, culture defines the vocabulary
and the level of abstraction of a country\'s language. Certainly that\'s
true of networking.

Computer networks began largely because of the ways humans segregate
their sharing, not out of a desire to share freely. TCP/IP -- and a lot
of its underlying structure -- evolved to meet a specific need: how can
we keep a computer network functioning in the event of a nuclear war?
When nodes go offline, randomly, how can surviving nodes keep the
communication going? If Boise is destroyed, how can we still communicate
with Seattle? Wiping out Kansas should not imply that we can\'t connect
with Nebraska.

Gruesome beginnings, indeed. Over time, though, those same TCP/IP
networks evolved to meet a less bellicose need: How can we keep a
network functioning efficiently if some of the paths are bottle-necked
or even out-of-service? Well, the answer is, \"build the ARPAnet\" --
now called the Internet -- which relies heavily on TCP/IP networks. The
OSI model underlying TCP/IP can adapt to changing loads, handle
significant failures, and strictly limit the network "blast radius"
(yes, sadly, that's what it's called) when things go wrong. TCP/IP
networks distil the core of human sharing into (arguably) a much simpler
and more predictable form.

Happily, the threat of nuclear war has dropped off substantially in the
meantime, though it sometimes raises an ugly eyebrow. Also happily, the
TCP/IP network has survived even the loss of its original purpose. This
tutorial is about the surviving network. Full disclosure: I used to work
in the WMD industry, but one day, I walked away and chose to promote
sharing with other humans, instead of dividing and cloistering them. And
I changed my official term for network failures from \"blast radius\" to
\"cone of silence\" (CoS), probably my happiest choice of all.

## Focusing on architecture {#org354722e}

With complicated subjects, it\'s always hard to know where to start.
There\'s a huge chicken-and-egg problem with TCP/IP when trying to
define terms. I prefer to take Isaac Newton\'s approach to physics, as
he did in the Principia -- create some definitions that start from
common things we\'re all likely to understand.

For example, Newton begins with mass; slightly paraphrasing his
definition:

-   The quantity of matter is defined as the density of that matter and
    the volume that it takes up, conjointly.

In other words, m = œÅ x V, or \"mass equals density times volume\". That
doesn\'t seem like much, but it\'s an astounding starting point. Hint:
If you haven\'t read an English translation of the Principia (it\'s
natively in Latin), you should take the time out to do so: it\'ll change
your understanding. Anyway, back to our story.

### Network architecture {#org3b0cd02}

It\'s very easy to just dive in, of course, and some fair percentage of
my readers will get what I\'m saying, but that isn\'t good enough for
this tutorial. Instead, imagine two computers, \"SanDiego\" and
\"Bangor\", located at opposite corners of the country. They want to
communicate via available networks. How do they do it?

Well, we could just hook up a wire between SanDiego and Bangor.


People probably did that, at one point, back in the day. It might have
even worked, until someone with a backhoe cut a cable. No problem!
We\'ll just use two wires. Surely we can get the first one fixed before
somebody cuts the second one, right?


Of course, it wouldn\'t take long to figure out that messages are
getting lost and garbled. After all, it\'s a long wire, which has lots
of impedance. Some signals will disappear into the noise long before
they get there. No problem! We\'ll just build repeaters, little boxes
that read the incoming signal and duplicate it at full voltage on the
outgoing line:


(Forgive the weird choice of cities, but I\'m trying to work from memory
here.) And if memory serves, leasing this space all over the country to
add repeaters -- especially at military bases like Redstone
(Huntsville), Fort Hood, and Point Mugu -- can get really expensive,
really fast.

### The AAC network model {#orgac9df6c}

By far a much easier way is to create and use the Internet. As the
Internet became \"the network\", it evolved into what some call the
\"access-aggregation-core\" network.

In the AAC model, SanDiego sends a message, labelled for Bangor, to some
router on the Internet (which one doesn\'t matter so much). If this
router doesn\'t know where Bangor is, it just sends it on to another
router, until the message finds a router that knows where to forward the
message:


Theoretically, this works great, but from a practical standpoint, there
are \"short circuits\" all over this network:


These \"sideways paths\" are there mostly for performance reasons, like
latency, redundancy, and so on. Sometimes they\'re there because someone
can get a better deal, so the reasoning is financial, too. Later on in
this tutorial, we\'ll talk about some of these issues -- and why network
architectures have evolved. For now, though, let\'s just say that they
have evolved to a more monochromatic design known at the Clos
architecture:


This more scalable architecture can basically use the same switch for
everything. There are leaf switches, known as \"top of rack\" (TOR)
switches, and spine switches. As I\'ve ghosted into the diagram, you
scale horizontally by adding more racks, and vertically by adding more
levels of spine switches. This architectural model is more economical to
scale, so it discourages these little \"side bets\" that plagued the
early Internet.

### Yesterday's phone network is today's Internet {#org7adbaaf}

When learning a language, it also helps to get into some of the
*history* of the people who speak that language. For instance, you may
have noticed that a lot of Cajuns -- who live in the humid swamps of the
southern United States -- often build houses in a unique way. They build
a very sloped main roof, surrounding the house with a somewhat-elevated,
wraparound porch.

To be honest, this design makes *no* sense for a people living in
\"hurricane alley\". They\'d be better off building houses out of
concrete block, with a metal and concrete roof tied to the base with
welded steel girders, and small windows instead of French doors. But
they don\'t, because of their *history*.

The word \"Cajun\" is a lazy contraction of *Acadian*, the people who
lived in Acadia, or \"New France\" in the 17th and 18th centuries. If
you look it up, you\'ll find that Acadia included New Brunswick, Maine,
and lots of Canadian maritime islands. They built houses with
high-pitched roofs, with wraparound porches, so that the heavy *snow
load* of winter would slide down the sloped roof, scoot off the porch
roof, and land in the yard. This gave them a clear outside area to take
care of outside business, such as chopping wood or skinning animals,
without having to wade through the snow.

As a homework assignment, you can Google how the Acadians got to South
Louisiana and South Mississippi; Wikipedia is largely accurate, if local
folklore means anything.

#### Reusing what already works {#org122484d}

In the same way, most of today's modern networking is just a direct
translation of the landline telephone system -- [the \"Plain Old
Telephone Service
(POTS)](https://networkencyclopedia.com/plain-old-telephone-service-pots/)\"
-- into the digital space. Network switching is really just an outgrowth
of crossbar, which is how local phone calls were "switched" or "routed"
to the correct telephone line. In most cases, every number dialled
closed one more relay, with all seven relays making a connection to the
target phone line.

Small exchanges often "swallowed" dialled digits. For example, if every
local phone number had the exchange "881", those numbers wouldn't
trigger any relays beyond just sending the call to the "881" frameset.
In some small exchanges, it wasn't even necessary to dial the exchange,
just the four digits of the phone number, if the caller had the same
exchange. My grandparents had such an arrangement for many years, as did
my partner\'s parents.

Essentially, these \"shorthand numbers\" were the early *subnets*.

#### Long distance and T1 {#org84769ee}

In order to maintain call quality, the very early telephone system
(about 1908) began to use repeaters and loading coils. A repeater
receives a signal and regenerates a new signal of the same frequency,
raising the signal back to the same power level. A loading coil adds
inductance to the line, which resists changes in current, keeping the
transmitted waveform more stable, that is, reducing the distortion
introduced by the impedance of the long wires.

The next evolution, T1 lines, couldn't compete with today's fibre
connections, but they did provide a speedy (at the time) 1.5Mbps
connection. For example, in the oil and gas industry of the early 1990s,
many of the city offices in New Orleans had wall after wall of T1 lines
wired directly into the building, so that they could get high-speed data
from the offshore oil platforms just a few miles away.

T1 wasn't originally designed for network traffic. The idea was to
multiplex phone calls on one line via Time-Division Multiplexing. TDM
split up the call traffic into little *digital* packets that were sent
on a rotating basis. The first T1 lines, which showed up around 1962,
could handle about 24 calls without the average telephone user noticing.
Telephone linemen, on the other hand, could usually tell by the
"clipped" nature of the call, as there is a distinctive flatness to the
conversation over a digital TDM circuit.

My first real job was telephone lineman, so I can attest to this
\"flatness\". In fact, I recall an actual training session in which we
listened to the same call on two different lines in stereo headphones.
In one ear, we heard the T1 call; in the other, the analog output of the
same conversation. Listening to them in stereo, in sync, made it easy to
learn the subtle differences.

The real point is that these "little digital packets" formed the model
for the *packet networking* we have today.

#### On the shoulders of giants {#orgd30f670}

Especially in the computer field, people who come up with new ideas love
to pretend that they invented it. But as Newton said (him again?), we
are \"standing on the shoulders of giants\". In fact, it actually helps
if you realise that today\'s networking technology evolved from
telephone technology, which evolved from carbon fibres and cups of acid,
which evolved from telegraph clickers, which evolved from cans and
strings.... If you look back far enough, everything about modern
networks makes perfect sense, because you can see the original problems
that drove today\'s designs.

For example, telephone connections have used balanced or twisted pair
wiring for more than 100 years. Twisted pairs resist interference from
other pairs of wires *because* they are twisted together. I have *read*
that in the very early days, the called party transmitted on one wire,
and the calling party transmitted on the other, but I\'ve never been
able to make much mathematical sense of that, so take that with a small
box of salt.

T1 lines just used ordinary, *double*-twisted-pair copper wiring. When
WAN and MAN networking became a thing, the phone company just repurposed
some of those pairs to carry data traffic. Many other key elements of
TCP/IP, like twisted-pair Ethernet cables, packet-based messaging, and
multiplexing (like TDM), are all just holdovers of the original
telephone system, repurposed for computer networking. Why invent
something when you have a working model? Just rename it.

#### To be fair... {#org039010f}

Actually, in many cases, renaming isn\'t actually a *terrible* idea,
because it often conveys the repurposing aspect of the new technology.
You can buy t-shirts that say, \"It\'s not really a cloud, it\'s just
someone else\'s server,\" but it\'s actually *useful* to say \"cloud\".
That implies that it\'s out there somewhere (you don\'t care where), it
may change randomly (as with the weather, you still don\'t care), and
you don\'t have to do anything about it.

Using the word \"cloud\" also kind of forces the providers to guarantee
the promise that you won\'t ever have to know anything about it except
an address where you can get to it, and maybe a handy script to upload
changes every time you save. The new name carries implications that
can\'t be drawn so easily from the term \"someone else\'s server\", and
that helps to set expectations and standards.

### The Internet infrastructure {#orgfd89ba2}

There\'s an idea floating around that the Internet is survivable because
any and every computer can connect any and every other computer. While
that might be possible, that\'s not generally how it works. There\'s
actually a hierarchy which we refer to as the Internet Infrastructure:

-   Internet Infrastructure -- a hierarchy of computers used to transfer
    messages from one computer to another.

Yes, the Internet is *theoretically* survivable because every computer
can connect to every other computer, but that's not standard operating
procedure. High-level networks (Network Service Providers, NSPs) connect
to at least three top level nodes called Network Access Points (NAPs),
aka Internet Exchange Points. At these points, packets to jump from one
NSP to another. NAPs are public access points, Metropolitan Area
Exchanges are private. These are virtually indistinguishable for the
purposes of this discussion:


And, of course, by now you\'ve probably guessed that many of the MAEs
are the residue of the phone company's early T1 nodes, which was the
initial backbone for the Internet. These MAEs act just like a NAP for
the purposes of this discussion.

### About Internet network traffic {#org4921912}

On-the-fly, Internet network paths can become very complicated and
somewhat unpredictable. As a result, there's rarely a reason to even
count how many hops a message takes, or where it hops, unless you're
trying to debug a broken route with, say, `traceroute`. From a TCP/IP
point of view, it's much easier to ignore the specific network, since
each one is custom built, so to speak. The path can theoretically change
every time a message is sent, even between the same two computers.

When it comes to designing and troubleshooting networks, knowing the
specific route (almost) never helps. What we do want to know about is
the network traffic between computers. We have to understand what kind
of data travels between computers, besides just the data we send. The
structure and grouping of message traffic in TCP/IP is governed by the
**OSI model**. Let\'s take a look.

## The OSI model {#org230dc0c}

No, that\'s not referring to the WWII forerunner of the CIA (which was
the *[OSS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Office_of_Strategic_Services)*
anyway), but to the *Open Systems Interconnect* model, once called
\"[GOSIP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Government_Open_Systems_Interconnection_Profile)\".
Networks are really just continuous wires. We need to understand what
travels on those wires, which depends on our perspective -- our level of
magnification.

At the highest "zoom" level, all we'll see are electrons travelling down
the wire; that's a level of abstraction that isn't comprehensible for
debugging purposes. About all we can tell is whether or not the
circuit's dead -- and not even that, if we don\'t pick a low range on
the voltmeter.

The Open Systems Interconnection model was created to standardise on a
few, well-defined levels. It defines how the data should be
*encapsulated*, how the transmission \"dance\" is carried out, and what
to do when things go wrong. Collectively, this *interface definition* is
called a *protocol*. As long as you follow the protocol, it doesn\'t
matter how you build your network device.

The OSI model looks something like this:


This model starts just *above* the raw physics, with the **physical
layer**, also known as **Layer 1**.

The choice of "1" makes sense, because this is the lowest level we
consider. Layers are normally added on top of each other. For example,
if you put six coats of varnish on a piece of furniture, you're going to
have six layers. The first layer you put on wouldn't sensibly be called
"layer 6"; neither does network layering work that way.

Here's a quick rundown of what each layer does. Most likely, we won't
get into details about all the layers, because the higher you go, the
more widely they vary with the user application. Higher layers don't
really help us better understand networking, any more than watching
electrons travel through a wire help us debug a missing packet.

### The physical layer (L1) {#org46eb38d}

The phrase "physical layer" may conjure up notions of physics, but don't
worry: we look at *signals*, not *electrons*. At the physical layer,
we're looking for binary (on/off) signals, set to the cadence of a
clock. Every computer brings its own clock to the party, so we
definitely need a way to "synchronise our watches". NTP, the network
time protocol, does the trick.

NTP is probably the oldest Internet protocol in use. It synchronises
subscriber computers to within a few milliseconds of UTC (Coordinated
Universal Time). That acronym is *not* out of order, by the way. English
speakers wanted CUT (for \"coordinated universal time\"), while French
speakers preferred TUC (for \"temps universel coordonn√©\"). \"UTC\" was
picked because, (1) it was a compromise between those two proposals, and
(2) there was already a \"UT\" (Universal Time) that is based on a
measure of the Earth\'s current angle of rotation and the International
Celestial Reference Frame....

Yeah, it really *is* better if you don\'t ask.

You could say that NTP only has one job: keeping time. Like all the
moving parts of a clock, though, keeping computer clocks in sync is very
difficult. If your curiosity is stronger than your fear of complexity,
you might [take a look at this NTP article on
Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_Time_Protocol). It\'ll
tell you more than you need to know about the protocol.

#### Variable latency {#orga797718}

Variable latency is the important thing to know about the physical
layer, because it affects the timing of network traffic. In order to
understand variable latency, we need to understand network latency.
Packets aren't sent without some delay, because of:

-   The processing delay - how long it takes the router to process the
    packet header.
-   A queuing delay - how long the packet sits idle in routing queues.
-   Transmission delay - how long it takes layer 1 to push the packet's
    bits onto the link.
-   Propagation delay - how long it takes the bits to travel through the
    wire to the other end.

The size of the queue directly influences how fast data can get onto the
link. The processing and transmission delays are real, though relatively
constant. The propagation delay doesn't just depend on the speed of
light, because there may be lots of other "relay" computers in the link.
Propagation depends on network architecture, network congestion, and the
number of hops (how many routers between source and destination), among
other things. As we'll see later on, within your enterprise, modern
cloud architectures usually create significantly less propagation delay.

Variable-latency networks are "variable" because of the density of
network traffic and the complexity of the route between hosts. We can't
predict congestion or routing, although we can influence local routing
by choosing the right network architecture. We can't predict
transmission delays, though we can statistically bound them. Almost all
digital networks are considered "variable-latency".

#### The physical layer is not very interesting {#orga5b1ebe}

In spite of the complexities given above, the physical layer really
doesn\'t do much for us when it comes to building and debugging
networks. Other than verifying that signals are flowing, the physical
layer doesn't usually tell us much about what happened to that DHCP
request that never made it to the router. Consequently, we really won't
talk that much about the physical layer.

Just know that it's the thing that's passing bits back and forth between
hosts, and very occasionally, we need to scan it to find network
breakage.

### The datalink layer (L2) {#org15da23a}

The **datalink layer** (the **link layer**, **Layer 2** or **L2**) also
has one purpose: send and receive IP datagrams. L2 doesn't maintain a
connection with the target host; it's intentionally "connectionless",
and it doesn't guarantee delivery or integrity of packets. It just ships
them between source and destination. Give it a message, give it a MAC
address, and it sends it; that\'s all.

At first, this message-agnostic approach may seem a little weird. L2 is
not without error-checking and recovery code, but it functions
efficiently *precisely* because it isn't concerned with the data, or
even the message containing the data. That might surprise you,
especially since the word \"datagram\" is sometimes used a little too
freely with respect to L2.

A datagram is just a basic network transfer unit -- the indivisible unit
for a given layer -- *any* given layer. If we're talking about L2, it's
an IEEE 802.xx frame. At the network layer (L3, we\'ll come to that in a
minute), it's a data packet. For the transport layer (L4), it would be
called a segment.

By now, you\'re probably wondering what the indivisible units in the
*physical layer* are called. *Chips*; they\'re called chips. Beats me.
But I do know that they are
[spread-spectrum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spread_spectrum) pulses
in the CDMA, noise-utilising transmission system that operates at that
layer. My advice? Unless you\'re a EE with some communications training,
you might not need to go there.

Since datagram isn't carefully used by everyone (think of User Datagram
Protocol), we'll agree to call these indivisible layer units PDUs
(protocol data units). This avoids conflation with other uses and
reminds you that it's the atomic unit at the current network layer. Just
remember that, at the link layer (L2), it's a frame.

#### MAC frames {#org33e09be}

A MAC frame, or just "frame", encapsulates the packets from the network
layer so that they can be transmitted on the physical layer. A frame can
be small or big, anywhere from 5 bytes up to the kilobyte range. The
upper size limit is called the maximum transmission unit (MTU) or
maximum frame size. This size is set by the particular network
technology in use.

This last observation brings up a good point: In order to talk sensibly
about frames, we'd need to say what kind of frame. We're almost always
talking about packet-switched networks, so there are potentially four
frame types to consider: Ethernet, fibre channel, V.42, and PPP
(point-to-point protocol).

Happily, Internet networks almost exclusively use Ethernet, as defined
in the IEEE 802 standards, so we'll stick to that particular frame type
for this discussion. Where other frame types may come into play, we'll
discuss those as special cases.

#### Ethernet {#org58b0eef}

Before explaining an Ethernet Frame, we need to give a little background
information about how Ethernet works; otherwise a lot of the frame
components either won't make sense, or you'll wonder how it works at
all.

Remember earlier, when we talked about voice radio, and the need to say
"over"? Well, Ethernet at the link layer is all about controlling the
conversation, so that computers don't "talk over each other". Ethernet
implements an algorithm called CSMA/CD, which stands for "carrier sense
multiple access with collision detection." This algorithm controls which
computers can access the shared medium (an Ethernet cable) without any
special synchronisation requirements.

"Carrier sense" means that every NIC does what humans (should) do when
we're talking: it waits for quiet. In this case, it's waiting for the
network to be quiet, that is, when no signal is being sent on the
network.

"Collision detection" means that, should two NICs both start to send on
a shared network at the same time (because the network was quiet), they
each receive a jam signal. This signal tells them to wait a specific,
randomly-generated amount of time before attempting again. Every time
subsequent messages collide, the NIC waits twice the amount of time it
previously waited. When it waits some maximum number of times, the NIC
will declare a failure and report that the message didn't go. This
ensures that only one frame is traversing the network at any given time.

#### Media Access Control (MAC) {#org6213567}

Systems like CSMA/CD are a subset of the Media Access Control (MAC)
protocol kit. MAC is one-half of the link layer, with Logical Link
Control (LLC) being the other half -- though these are sometimes called
sub-layers. LLC mostly just defines the frame format for the 802.xx
protocols, like WiFi, so we can safely ignore it for the moment.

If you've worked with networks at all, you've heard of MAC addresses.
Those are basically unique serial numbers assigned to network interface
devices (like NICs) at the time of manufacture. Theoretically, they are
unique in the world, not counting virtual NICs in virtual machine
environments. MAC address collisions do happen when using VMs, and there
are ways to fix it, assuming that your VMs are confined to a subnet.

The MAC sub-layer is connected to the physical layer by a
media-independent interface (MII), independent of the actual link
protocol (e.g, cellular broadband, Wi-Fi radio, Bluetooth, Cat5e, T1,
...). You can learn more about the MII if you're so inclined, but we
won't address it again in the context of this tutorial.

Essentially, the MAC sub-layer grabs higher-level frames and makes them
digestible by the physical layer, by encoding them into an MII format.
It adds some synchronisation info and pads the message (if needed). The
MAC sub-layer also adds a frame check sequence that makes it easier to
identify errors.

In conventional Ethernet networks, all this looks something like the
following:


Let's decode those blocks of bits:

-   The Preamble is 7 bytes of clock sync, basically just zeroes and
    ones like this: ...0101010101... This gives the receiving station a
    chance to catch up and sync their clock, so the following data isn't
    out of sync (and thus misinterpreted). To delve just a little
    deeper, the Preamble helps the receiving NIC figure out the exact
    amount of time between encoded bits (it's called clock recovery).
    NTP is nice, but Ethernet is an asynchronous LAN protocol, meaning
    it doesn't expect perfectly synchronised clocks between any two
    NICs. The Preamble is similar to the way an orchestra conductor
    might "count the players in" so they all get the same rhythm to
    start. Before clock recovery, there was MPE. Clock recovery is much
    more reliable than trying to get computers all over the world synced
    up to the same clock frequency and the same downbeat (starting
    point). Ethernet actually started out that way with something called
    Manchester Encoding or Manchester Phase Encoding (MPE). This was
    important because electrical frequency varies not only across the
    world, but also from moment to moment when the power is slightly
    "dirty". MPE involved bouncing a bit between two fractional voltages
    using a 20MHz oscillator to generate a reference square wave. It
    works, but it's not very efficient, so MPE was scrapped in favour of
    using the Preamble, the way that projectionists use alignment marks
    on reels of movie film.
-   The Start Frame Delimiter (SFD) is the last chance for clock sync.
    It is exactly 10101011, where the "11" tells the receiving station
    that the real header content starts next. The receiving NIC has to
    recover the clock by the time it hits the SFD, or abandon the frame
    to the bit bucket.
-   The Destination Address (DAddr) is six bytes long, and gives the
    physical address -- the MAC address -- of the next hop. Be aware
    that the next hop might be the destination, but it's also possible
    that the next hop might be a NAP, MAE, NSP, or intermediate ISP.
    It's basically the next address in the direction of the destination
    that the sender knows about. Unlike the Source Address, the
    Destination Address can be in a broadcast format (similar to a
    subnet like 192.18.0.0, but using MAC addresses).
-   The Source Address (SAddr) is also a six-byte MAC address, this time
    the MAC address of the sender, which does not change as long as the
    message is traversing only layer-2 (Ethernet) switches and routers.
-   The PDU Length (PDULen) gives the byte length of the entire frame,
    assuming that it's 1500 or less. If it's longer than that, it
    indicates a message type, like IPv4, ARP, or a "q-tagged" frame,
    which carries a VLAN ID.
-   The DSAP, SSAP, and Control elements are each one byte in length,
    and help define devices and protocols. For the most part, we won't
    be worried about these with typical networks. Just know that as more
    and more 802 point-standards come out (e.g., 802.11, WiFi), these
    elements get longer and more complex.
-   The Data or "Payload" is the actual packet being sent, which in the
    case of TCP/IP, is just a TCP header attached to a fixed-length
    chunk of the application's data. It's passed on from the layer
    above. It cannot be less than 46 bytes, and in conventional
    Ethernet, it cannot be larger than 1500 bytes. If the actual data is
    too small, it's padded out to 46 bytes.
-   The CRC or "Frame Checksum" (FCS) is a standard checksum, used to
    verify that the message hasn't been corrupted along the way.

The Preamble and SFD are often considered to be part of the IEEE
"packet", so some people start counting the "frame" at the Destination
Address. That distinction shouldn't affect anything meaningful that we
do with networks, but it's nice to keep in mind, in case you run into
someone who groups packets differently than you do.

#### Trunking VLANs {#org44a59d8}

There is a crucial modification to the basic frame format called a P/Q
or VLAN Tag. This allows something called VLAN trunking, which means
sending all the VLAN data over the same wire and port, but giving the
NICs a field (the P/Q tag) to control access. On paper, it looks
something like this:


As you can see in the modified P/Q frame, the following fields replace
part of the frame:

-   Sixteen bits of tags or a protocol ID.
-   Three bits representing a priority.
-   One bit is used as a Canonical Format Indicator (CFI), which is 0 if
    the following VLAN ID is in Ethernet format, or 1 if it's in Token
    Ring format.
-   Twelve bits of VLAN ID.

This matters when we're building complex networks with lots of VLANS
that probably cross over switches. After all, VLANs were initially
controlled with ports and switches, although they more commonly use tags
now. When more than one VLAN spans multiple switches, frames need to
carry VLAN information that can be used by switches to sort or "trunk"
the traffic.

##### The origin of "trunking" {#org5331e32}

The word "trunking" is derived from the telephone network term trunk
lines, which are lines connecting switchboards.

In the original telephone company model, each telephone had a subscriber
line, which was a wire that went straight from the local Central Office
(CO) to that subscriber's telephone. Each CO had one switchboard, though
it might have many seats.

Connections between Central Offices were handled by trunk lines, because
they ran between phone company facilities. You'd have a thick cable with
lots of pairs running from CO to CO, basically enough wires to handle
something like 35% of the possible calls. If you ever got the message,
"All circuits are busy now; please try your call again later", you've
heard what happens when the system is "trunking above capacity" or
"TAC'd", as it was called.

At the CO, the wires would "branch" and run all over the place: First to
junction points (those five-foot-tall boxes you see from time to time on
the road), then to interface points (the square cans beside the road
every half mile or so, also called "pedestals") and from there to
subscriber homes. When you draw out this network, it looks like a tree,
where the bundles of cables between COs look like the trunks of trees.

##### Multiplexing LAN channels, actually {#orge407fef}

With VLAN trunking, by the way, we're not just multiplexing packets,
we're actually multiplexing LAN channels, so to speak.

In the parlance of networks, especially VLANs, the term "trunking" is
used to indicate the sharing of network routes. This sharing is made
possible by the Ethernet VLAN tags, which make the VLAN-bound messages
less dependent on switches and routers to get the traffic to the right
place. Otherwise, you'd have to designate complicated port
configurations for switches, which is particularly easy to misconfigure.

Note that the MAC sub-layer is responsible for managing CDMA/CD, that
is, detecting a clear line, initiating re-transmission if there's a jam
signal, etc. On the way in, the MAC sub-layer verifies the CRC/FCS and
removes frame elements before passing the data up to the higher layers.
Basically, anything that some other MAC layer did to encapsulate the
message for sending, the receiving MAC layer un-does on the way in.

##### VLANs, subnets, and fabrics {#orgc62f266}

When working with networks, you will frequently be concerned with VLANs,
subnets, and fabrics, which are all network groupings:

-   Subnets define (group) a range of IP addresses.
-   VLANs group subnets.
-   Fabrics group VLANs.

Let's give each of these terms their due.

###### Subnets {#org5a7e2e2}

A subnet is a range or collection of IP addresses. A subnet just means
"sub-network," and that's exactly what it is: a subset of IP addresses
that can be treated like a single block for some operations.

Subnets are defined in CIDR (Classless Inter-Domain Routing) notation.
If you want to use the addresses from 192.168.13.0 to 192.168.13.255 in
a subnet, you can specify that with 192.168.13.0/24. The "24" refers to
the number of bits in the subnet address, with the remainder out of 32
bits free to address hosts. Since 8 bits can represent 256 things, that
means /24 gives you the last octet, or 255 host IP addresses.

Whatever happened to subnet classes? Subnets used to be defined in terms
of subnet classes, like A, B, and C. That got to be a limitation,
because those three classes define a fixed number of bits of the IP
address that represent the split between subnet addresses and host
addresses. In other words, the class defined how many hosts could be in
the network, and three classes wasn't really adequate to address all the
possible permutations that network architects needed. The change to CIDR
notation made subnets more granular, allowing many more subnets from the
same network.

###### VLANs {#orgc8c8b50}

A VLAN used to be a series of IP addresses that could access a given
port on a specific switch, generally the switch that gated some
protected resource. With the advent of VLAN trunking (see above), VLANs
are marked with the 802.1Q (P/Q) bits in the MAC frame. In theory, any
set of addresses can be associated with any VLAN.

Let me strongly encourage a correspondence of subnets to VLANs. Every IP
should be in exactly one subnet, and every subnet should be part of
exactly one VLAN. You don't have to do that: you could, for example,
have two different subnets that overlap, like 192.168.43.0/24 and
192.168.43.0/26. The ".26" subnet would use fewer bits for the host
addresses, so only some of the addresses would overlap. A decent network
designer generally avoids this kind of address overlap.

Likewise, putting one subnet in two different VLANs might be possible,
but it isn't practical or easy to debug when conflicts happen. You
should endeavour to enforce a clean "fan-out" across the network, with
no possibility of conflicting IP addresses.

###### Fabrics {#org60d568e}

A fabric just collects VLANs together. If you stick to the clean
fan-out, that also means that a fabric collects subnets. A fabric
provides a higher level grouping.

Consider an example: Suppose you have one VLAN for HR, and one VLAN for
payroll, so that nobody else can see HR's private files, and likewise
you've got payroll data limited to just those people who should see it.

Some executives are entitled to see anything and everything about the
corporation. An "executive" fabric would group all VLANs together, so
that people admitted to that fabric can access the VLANs without having
to be explicitly added to each one. That's very handy in really large
organisations, saving a lot of time and effort.

#### Visualising the link layer {#orgf55c28e}

Let's start with a message coming on Layer 1 from SanDiego to Bangor.
When the message comes in, the link layer does the following things:

-   It synchronises the NIC, so that bits will indeed be recognised as
    bits and the message can be properly decoded.
-   It handles the source and destination addresses, using ARP as
    necessary.
-   It interprets the length/type bytes and uses them, which means it
    must judge the length of a frame, and of the data in a frame, or,
    alternatively, decide whether a frame is IPv4, ARP, or VLAN
    ("q-tagged").
-   It processes VLAN tags, which means, at the very least, dealing with
    the message priority, deciding whether the VLAN frame is Ethernet or
    Token Ring, and capturing and using the VLAN ID. The layer handles
    messages by priority, knows how and when to send Ethernet or Token
    Ring frames, and knows how to route traffic to a specific VLAN.
-   It computes the checksum to make sure the message is valid.

Next, we'll take a look at the network layer, where most of the message
transactions take place, and where most of our debugging will be done.

### Interlayer addressing: ARP {#org0a76b34}

One frequently asked question is this: Is ARP a layer 2 or layer 3
protocol? Actually, it's both, as you'll discover later, but it does all
of its work at L2. One way to distinguish L2 from L3 is to find out what
happens inside the firmware of the Network Interface Card (NIC), and
that's usually where ARP takes place. ARP maps MAC addresses, which is
how things are addressed in L2, into other addresses (e.g., IP
addresses), which is how L3 finds things.

In theory, every NIC card in the world has a unique identifier, called a
*MAC address*. "MAC" stands for "Media Access Control" -- you can find a
little history of this on Wikipedia, if you're interested.

When you're assigning MAC addresses with virtual machines, of course,
you may be re-using one that's actually assigned to a network device out
there somewhere. Inside your Layer 2 network, that isn't a problem,
because only devices connected to a physical switch -- that's actually
connected to the physical Internet -- care about unique MAC addresses.
Inside your network, the only conflicts you need to worry about are the
ones you create by hand-assigning MAC addresses.

The shorter answer to that implied question is this: MAC addresses must
be unique across the domain where they're used.

#### TCP/IP does not use MAC addresses {#orga714be9}

If we look at the IP datagram again, we see that it doesn't know about
MAC addresses at all:

TCP, UDP, and a number of other protocol stacks are written to use IP
addresses. Routers depend on IP addresses, as we've already seen. This
creates a bit of a conundrum: How do we map between MAC and IP
addresses, and what does the mapping? Is it a layer 2 or layer 3
operation?

The first thing to remember is that the MAC address is "ROM-burned" into
the NIC card. IP addresses, on the other hand, are assigned to a NIC by
a DHCP server or an administrator. This intentional separation of
addressing schemes is what makes the Internet flexible.

#### Fixed versus assigned addressing {#org4dfe172}

Here's an analogy. Your postal address doesn't *actually* define where
your house is located. There are two layers of other addressing schemes
that are actually used by government organisations, like your county tax
assessor or the local air ambulance company.

One is your land survey location. Depending on where you live, this is
defined by a series of coordinates that go something like this: county,
township, section, plat, lot, etc. If you've ever looked at your
property tax bill, it will have your postal address on it, but it will
not actually use your postal address to define the taxable property.
Instead, it uses this unique set of (rather obscure) coordinates to
place you exactly on land survey maps.

But that's not good enough for the air ambulance, for two reasons.
First, the survey maps are huge, complex, and hard to interpret, and
they change somewhat as property is bought or sold. Second, helicopter
navigation is intentionally independent of political boundaries.
Instead, the air ambulance will use your latitude and longitude, which
allows them to uniquely locate you on the earth. Granted, the ambulance
company has a tool somewhere that automatically does the maths of
translating your postal address to lat/long coordinates, but the
principle holds.

In terms of your local network, each of these "address levels" applies.
Your postal address corresponds to the IP address of a machine. That IP
address may or may not be unique, depending on the domain. For example,
you can use Google Maps to try and locate something like "20 Main
Street", and you'll get a really long list of responses that vary by
city.

Likewise, there are probably hundreds of thousands of local networks
using addresses in the "192.168..." subnet, since it's so common for
local IP addressing. As mentioned above, routers at the network layer
take care of protecting these unique local addresses when going out on
the Internet. On the other hand, your NIC's MAC address is like the GPS
lat/long coordinates; it's unique across the entire world.

What about the analogue of survey maps? Well, it's not hard to argue
that these are more like the MAC addresses that you assign to your VMs.
Every county in a state like, say, Mississippi has the coordinates
Township 1, Section 1, Parcel 1 -- but the outer domain (the county)
makes those coordinates unique. Granted, we don't use a different format
for MAC addresses for VMs than we do for Internet-connected NICs, but
you get the idea.

#### Address resolution {#orgd197f23}

Address resolution is what we call the process of mapping between IP
addresses and MAC addresses. It's done with something called ARP, which
stands for "Address Resolution Protocol". Oddly enough, ARP takes on a
life of its own, so you may hear it discussed in unusual ways. Some
people call it "the ARP", others speak of "arpd" (the ARP daemon),
although if you look at the man page for arpd, you'll see those
characterisations are not precisely correct.

A frequent question is, "Where does ARP take place?" Maybe the better
question is, "Where is ARP implemented?" As always with Internet-related
things, the answer can vary, but normally, ARP is implemented as part of
the embedded code in the NIC. Technically, this means that ARP operates
at Layer 2. More often, you'll see vendors hedge their bets on this,
with phrases such as "operates below the Network Layer", as in this
explanation.

In reality, in order to work correctly, ARP has to map IP and MAC
addresses, since the ARP message looks something like this:

To better understand, let's walk an ARP call. It begins in say, a Web
browser, when the browser makes a call to parse the URL. In most cases,
that URL contains a hostname (not an IP address), so the following sort
of dance takes place:

We won't go into this in much detail now, just know that the browser is
able to gather an IP address, if it exists. To make the walk-through
less confusing, let's assume that we're looking for a host with IP
192.168.17.4.

Next, the browser requests a connection with 192.168.17.4, using the TCP
protocol, which sends a connection request, as an IP packet, to
192.168.17.4. Along the way, there is probably more than one router hop.

ARP sends a broadcast request to everything on the relevant subnet. This
request looks like the ARP message above, but it's encoded as a MAC
frame, which helps to answer the often-fuzzy question, "Is ARP Layer 2
or Layer 3?" As you see, this is an L2 message. Incidentally, ARP only
works as a broadcast, by the way; that is, it only works on a broadcast
network.

A very important note for some systems like MAAS: ARP requests don't
typically span VLANs.

Essentially, this ARP message contains the IP address 192.168.17.4, but
no corresponding MAC address in the message. This tells the owner of
192.168.17.4 that it should reply with a similar ARP message, including
its MAC address. When the sender receives the ARP reply, it can send the
datagram directly to the destination host, embedded in an Ethernet
frame, using the MAC address.

By the way, for efficiency, the sending host and the intermediate
routers are all doing ARP caching. They copy down the mapping between IP
and MAC addresses, holding onto it for about twenty minutes. In terms of
most network transactions, twenty minutes is an eternity.

#### Messages are sent to MAC addresses {#orgec597f9}

We often speak of TCP/IP as if messages are sent from one IP address to
another, but that's actually not strictly true. Messages are sent to MAC
addresses. IP addresses are only used to get MAC addresses, so the
message can go through.

We can return to the air ambulance company to see a practical analogy. A
911 call comes in for "20 Main Street, Yourtown, Yourstate,
Yourpostalcode". The address is sent to the pilot of the helicopter, who
punches the address into his GPS. The GPS uses the postal address to
retrieve the lat/long coordinates, which are then used to guide the
helicopter, via satellite navigation.

The same sort of thing happens when you use the GPS navigator in your
car. The navigator is translating a logical (postal) address to a
physical (lat/long) address on the surface of the earth, calculating a
route, and translating that route back to logical landmarks (street
names) to let you know how to get there.

By the way, You should also note that ARP only works with IPv4. Certain
other protocols, like Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP), don't make use of
ARP at all.

#### The ARP frame {#orgd3747e0}

ARP sends requests as an Ethernet frame, using the MAC address. If you
remember the MAC frame from earlier:

The ARP frame is just a special case of the MAC frame, replacing
everything the DSAP, SSAP, control bits, and data with the ARP message
shown above. The resulting ARP frame looks something like this:

Based on the above diagram, you can see how the ARP request fits into
the Ethernet frame to make an ARP frame.

#### The ARP cache {#orge4d07a1}

Let's take a look at the ARP cache on a local system, `cloudburst`. We
can do that like this:

You'll see that all three bridges are in a DOWN state, and again,
`lxdbr0` is so cold that it doesn't even show up in the ARP table. Let's
bring up a LXD VM connected to `lxdbr0` and look at the ARP table again:

Note that the `lxdbr0` bridge now shows up and has a MAC address, too --
no incomplete entry here. If we look at the MAC address of `lxdbr0` in
the `ip` listing, we'll see it matches up.

Those "(incomplete)" entries are old. They've been cached, but no
traffic has passed through those bridges in a really long time. The
cache is just persistent in holding onto the IP addresses, but not the
MAC addresses (since they could be stale). We can prove this to
ourselves by clearing the cache:

...and rebuilding the ARP table:

#### More about ARP {#orgc3a6084}

Another form of ARP is promiscuous ARP, in which some proxy host
pretends to be the destination host and provides an ARP response on
behalf of the actual destination host. You shouldn't use this form of
ARP unless there's no other choice. You can Google it (and use it at
your own risk), but it won't be described here.

There is also gratuitous ARP, when the source and destination IP
addresses are the same. This can be used for at least two purposes:

1.  To find out if someone else already has the source machine's IPv4
    address, a technique called Address Conflict Detection by some
    references.
2.  To update the source machine's new MAC address (e.g., a new NIC card
    was installed) in upstream ARP cache entries. This is something akin
    to pre-caching MAC addresses before they're actually needed.

You can read more about these (and many more) nuances of ARP, but this
introduction should answer most of the immediate questions.

### The network layer {#orgb6daeb0}

You might have noticed in the original OSI model that "IP" was part of
Layer 3, and protocol stacks like UDP and TCP were part of Layer 4. It's
a little bit confusing that we say "TCP/IP" when the "IP" really applies
to so many other protocols like UDP and ICMP. There are certainly other
protocols and protocol stacks, but for the purposes of these networks,
we're talking almost exclusively about TCP/IP.

The network layer does not guarantee delivery. Essentially, it makes
every effort to deliver IP datagrams (packets) to the destination, but
it's error-handling is pretty simple: just toss the packet into the
bit-bucket.

It's also a connectionless layer, meaning the packets making up a
message aren't part of an ongoing conversation. They can be split up,
encoded, and sent separately, by different routes, and arrive completely
out of order. And packets can get duplicated or corrupted. Figuring all
this out is the job of the protocol stack (e.g., TCP) in layer 4. The
network layer, L3, just delivers packets.

Network byte order: A rarely needed (but useful) fact is that the
network sends bytes in big endian order. That means bytes are
transmitted starting with bit 0 and working down to bit 31, usually
eight bits at a time. A lot of the computers on the Internet use little
endian encoding, which starts at the other end of the word. In those
cases, the byte order has to be reversed somewhere between the
computer's memory and Layer 3. For most situations, that fact isn't
particularly useful, but there is the occasional fault that involves
failure to reverse byte order along the path from RAM to NIC.

#### What is this \"packets\" you speak of, Kimosabe? {#orgd6d9fa6}

Packets are basic Internet Protocol (IP) message units. A message will
probably be split into multiple packets by L4 (the transport layer) so
it can be efficiently sent.

For example, imagine that you're sending a very long letter to your
friend, and all you have are lots of envelopes and first-class stamps.
If you've ever done a lot of mailing, you'll know that mailing a
one-ounce letter costs you, say, fifty-eight cents. If you add another
ounce of paper to it, that second ounce only costs you, say, twenty
cents. But all you have are first class (i.e., fifty-eight-cent) stamps.

If you don't want to waste your money, you can either cram more pages in
the envelope, until you're at three ounces (the most you can get with
two stamps), or send two letters, each with one ounce in it. The way
envelopes go through the mailing system, you're better off not
over-stuffing an envelope. So what do you do?

You sit down and write the letter to your friend, carefully numbering
the pages. Then you divide it into piles of pages that are just under
one ounce. Finally, you put each pile into an addressed, stamped
envelope and mail each letter separately. When your friend gets the
letters, it doesn't matter which one gets there first, because they can
reassemble your message, using the page numbers.

#### Fixed packet lengths and segmented messaging {#org4559c54}

We could have designed computer networks to take messages of
indeterminate lengths, but that presents some unique challenges when
trying to manage network traffic. For example, suppose you send seven
overstuffed letters to your friend, and so does everyone else on your
block? All these huge letters aren't going to fit in one
letter-carrier's bag, so they'll have to either send out two delivery
people, or wait until tomorrow to send out someone's letters.

Choosing a fixed (relatively short) length makes it statistically
possible for everyone's letters (everyone's messages) to be delivered at
a fairly constant, reliable rate. That rate will vary with the size of
the overall message, not with who threw their message on the Internet
first. A larger message takes longer to send.

Messages are split into packets of consistent length before they're
passed to L3, so larger messages take longer. It's statistically more
efficient to split messages into equally-sized packets than any other
arrangement -- the method that gets the highest count of complete
messages through the network in a given amount of time. In network
terminology, it's the highest-throughput approach to network traffic.
Specifically, this technique is called multiplexing.

#### IP packets {#orgb809a18}

The IP datagram (packet) is the backbone of most modern networks. The
following diagram depicts an IPv4 header, which attaches to the front of
data packets up to about 65K long:


Note that IPv6 headers have only the version field in common with IPv4
headers; otherwise, they are completely different. Here are the header
fields and what information they carry:

-   IP Protocol Version: This is "4" for IPv4 and "6" for IPv6. There
    are lots of others, but they generally don't touch a typical
    network.
-   Internet Header Length: The number of 32-bit words in the header,
    including the options (but not including the data, since it's just
    the header). Most of the time, this will have the value "5", but
    options do exist and are sometimes included.
-   Differentiated Services Code Point: This is used to specify special
    classes of service. Normally, IP packets are delivered on a
    "best-effort" basis, that is, Layer 3 will try everything possible
    to make sure a packet gets delivered. You can cause L3 to deliver
    packets with higher priority (implying more certainty) by using a
    different DSCP.
-   ECN = Explicit Congestion Notification: These bits are both set by
    an ECN-capable router when that router is above a certain traffic
    threshold. They are there to alert a sender to slow down (or expect
    delays) when the network segment in use is particularly congested.
-   Total Length of IP Packet: This field indicates the length of the
    entire packet, including the data. This makes it possible to
    calculate the byte offset of the data within the datagram.
-   Identification: This is a serial number, generated by the sending
    NIC, that helps the participants uniquely identify the datagram. In
    a sense, it works like the little "take-a-number" tickets you get at
    the hamburger stand: Eventually, the number will repeat, but the
    repeat cycle is so long that there's no chance of confusing packets.
    The sequential nature of this field, when used in concert with the
    Flags and Fragmentation Offset field, helps the protocol stack
    correctly reassemble the message.
-   Flags: This field is basically used to indicate that a packet is a
    fragment of a longer message.
-   Fragmentation Offset: Used with the Identification sequence number,
    this field allows the system to know which packets precede or follow
    this one when re-assembling the message.
-   Time to Live (TTL): This indicates the number of routers that a
    datagram can pass through before it's discarded. Since routers
    function by replacing their own destination address with the IP
    address of the next hop, this essentially limits the number of times
    a packet's destination IP can be changed. Most RFC documents suggest
    keeping this number at 64, it's more often set to something like 255
    without any real bottlenecks.
-   Protocol: This field indicates the higher level protocol (the
    protocol stack) that generated this message. Examples are given for
    TCP and UDP in the figure.
-   Header Checksum: This calculates a checksum for the header only.
    It's only used in IPv4. Doing integrity-checking on the data is the
    responsibility of Layer 4.
-   Source Address: This is the IP address of the sender of the packet,
    for this hop only. As shown in the figure below, routers will change
    this address so they can get the answer back.
-   Destination Address: This is the IP address of the destination, for
    this hop only. As shown below, routers change this address to act as
    brokers in the IP chain.

#### Routing {#orgbf75bca}

We now have enough concepts in play to talk about routing. Routing takes
place at the network layer, by changing the source and destination
addresses (without losing track of the replaced address). The process
looks something like this:


The router typically assigns a unique port number to the outbound
message, and records the source IP against that port number. When the
message comes back to it on that port number, it can look up the IP
address of the NIC that sent the packet and route the answer back.

### The transport layer {#orgb58489d}

Layer 4 brings us to protocols implemented only by the end hosts (i.e.,
not by the routers or other switching gear that connect the network).
This layer handles things like redundancy, confirmed delivery, managing
packets on an unreliable network, and so forth. This is the last layer
that TCP/IP has anything to say about; layers above this are unique to
specific applications. Troubleshooting this level would involve knowing
about entire protocol sets, like UDP or TCP.

If the Internet Protocol (IP) is connectionless, the transport layer is
all about connections. The transport-layer protocol in use -- we'll talk
exclusively about Transmission Control Protocol or TCP here -- the L4
protocol is the last place in the stack where the entire message exists
in one piece. L4 breaks up larger messages into segments. Each segment
gets a TCP header, and gets passed on to L3 where it becomes an IP
packet.

### TCP: Transmission Control Protocol {#org048798c}

I mentioned above the Layer 4 is all about connections, but the
situation\'s not always that simple. UDP, for example does not have any
mechanisms for delivering data reliably. I have a t-shirt that says,
\"I\'d tell you a joke about UDP, but you might not get it.\" The pun
turns on the fact that UDP is sort of a *fire and forget* protocol.

The problem of making sure the message got delivered is as old as time.
There are many logic problems that involve an army sending a message
between battalions, indicating the time of a planned attack. But if the
messenger has to sneak through enemy lines to deliver it, how do we know
it got there? Error-correcting codes help, but at the end of the day,
nothing beats the Automatic Repeat Request, cleverly abbreviated
**ARQ**.

ARQ simply means we keep sending the message until we know for sure it
got there, intact. We need two mechanisms in order to make this work: an
ACK (I got the message) and a CRC (Cyclic Redundancy Check). If the
message gets there, and it passes the CRC, an ACK is sent.

Returning to the sneaky messenger, what if the messenger got there and
delivered the message, but didn\'t get back to tell the sender that the
message got through? That\'s a more complicated problem. In the
networking world, we deal with that by waiting a set amount of time for
an ACK before re-sending: The recipient has to know how to deal with
duplicate messages.

How long do we want? That\'s a really complex topic called \"timeout and
re-transmission\", and I\'m going to skip over that here. You can find a
lot of great sources in Google that will help you with that.

The most important things to take away from timeouts, though, are that
(1) messages may arrive out of order, so the ACK signal needs to be
tagged with the ID of the message received, and (2) the recipient has to
be able to reassemble the messages in the correct order.

Oh, and there has to be a limit on how many unacknowledged messages a
sender is willing to leave hanging. If the sender sends three messages
and gets no ACKs, it might not send out sequence number four until the
other end catches up. This number of outstanding, unacknowledged
messages is called a \"sliding window\". If the sliding window is three
messages, and number four hasn\'t been acknowledged, number 8 won\'t be
sent yet.

Sometimes it helps to think of it like jelly beans in a jar with a small
opening; only three or four jelly beans can pop through the mouth of the
jar at any given time -- the rest will have to wait. One falls out,
another one gets to the edge of the jar, and the whole muddle of beans
moves one bean closer to freedom. Okay, weird, but it does help
sometimes.

The simplest way to envision how it works, is, well, to actually look at
how it works, hence the next section on the TCP header.

#### The TCP header {#org9601318}

Here's a diagram of the L4-to-L3 hand-off:


We can get a pretty good idea what happens at Layer 4 just by decoding
the contents of the TCP header. It contains the following fields:

-   Source port: the application port number of the host sending the
    data. For example, if this is an FTP message, the source port would
    probably be 21.
-   Destination port: the port number of the application requested on
    the destination host. If this is FTP, again this port would likely
    be 21.
-   Sequence number: the sequence number of this segment of data, to
    help the other end put the data back together in the correct order,
    as well as help Level 4 on the receiving end know whether a packet's
    been dropped or lost. This handles the fact that segments don\'t
    necessarily arrive in order.
-   Acknowledgement number: essentially, the next sequence number the
    destination host is expecting; used to "gate" packets through the
    connection. This is a smart way to ACK packets so that the recipient
    knows which messages have been received.
-   TCP header length: given to know where the data begins.
-   Reserved: reserved for future use, basically; currently always set
    to 0.
-   Code bits: essentially a set of flags; see the list below.
-   Window: used to negotiate the "window" size, that is, how many bytes
    the destination host is willing to receive at once; this allows for
    the most efficient transmission possible, based on the
    characteristics of the two communicating hosts. This is the sliding
    window that defines how many messages can be sent (but not
    acknowledged) before the sender pauses. The \"negotiable\" part is
    what makes for efficient networks: the sender and receiver can
    quickly get to know each other and know how many messages they can
    \"trust\" to be delivered without an ACK.
-   Checksum (CRC): used to check the integrity of the segment.
-   Urgent pointer: data byte count where urgent data ends; used if the
    urgent flag is set (see below).

The code bits can indicate the following things:

-   URG: indicates that the urgent pointer field is meaningful, used to
    prioritise this message over other messages.
-   ACK: used to acknowledge successful delivery of the previous
    segment.
-   PSH: push notification; tells the receiving host the message is
    complete, you can push the data to the application.
-   RST: request a connection reset when the error level reaches a
    certain threshold; basically, "let's try that again from the top."
    This is considered an abnormal termination of the TCP connection.
-   SYN: used for a three-way TCP handshake; this handshake is how
    sender and receiver sync up; it serves a purpose similar to the
    preamble in a MAC frame, but at a different level of
    synchronisation.
-   FIN: we're done, close the connection. This is considered a normal
    termination of a TCP connection.
-   NS/CWR/ECE: used to provide Explicit Congestion Notification; note
    that OSI provides several methods for endpoints to know that the
    network is congested.

#### TCP is like a phone call {#org10b30f8}

As you can see from the bytes above, TCP is all about the state of a
connection, which is basically the same as a phone call. When you pick
up the receiver, you and the caller exchange information. You say "bye"
when the call is over. If it's a bad connection or one end suddenly gets
noisy (think jack-hammers outside), one of you can reset the connection
by saying, "Let me call you back in a minute." Take a minute and try to
see how the other header bytes fit this analogy.

Also like a telephone call, TCP provides a connection (the call, however
long it lasts), flow control (provided by the two parties on the call),
multiplexing (handled by the two handsets, basically letting through
multiple frequencies and sounds, so that you can get the tone and breath
sounds of the other person, not just their raw words). Likewise, the two
parties try to handle the reliability of the connection by making sure
you understand each other.

The analogy spreads a little because some of the items (connection,
multiplexing) are handled by the telephone, and some are handled by the
people operating the telephone (flow control, reliability). In the
network, the Level 4 protocol stack handles it all.

#### There\'s a lot more here {#org5b4f7ff}

There is a lot more to know about TCP, like:

-   Variable windows
-   Flow and congestion control
-   Reliability and the TCP service model
-   Encapsulation
-   Connection management
-   Etc.

You should now have enough basic knowledge to transition to the
[excellent Wikipedia article about
TCP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_Control_Protocol). A
word of warning, though: this rabbit hole is very deep, so weigh what
you\'re learning with what you actually need to know from this point on.

### The session layer {#org297c586}

Layer 5, the session layer, is where ongoing interactions between
applications happen. The data is couched in terms of things an
application might understand (e.g., cookies for a Web browser). This is
also the layer where check-pointing (i.e., saving work finished so far)
happens. At this layer, we'd discuss things like RPC, SQL, or NetBIOS.

### The presentation layer {#org50464ca}

The presentation layer converts data between formats and ensures
standard encodings are used to present the information to the
application. This layer is all about file formats: ASCII, EBCDIC, JPEG,
GIF, and HTML, to name just a few.

### The application layer {#org21596cd}

The top layer, layer 7, is totally the province of the application(s)
involved in processing messages. Two techs talking about this layer
would be swapping stories about application protocols, like FTP, DNS,
SMTP, or NFS. Almost nothing that happens at this layer -- except for
throughput estimates or fouled daemon code -- filters into designing or
debugging networks.

Copyright (C) 2020-2023 by stormrider; All Rights Reserved
