---
layout: post
title: "blog 2025-12-28"
date: 2025-12-28
---

* personal journal of stormrider

Sun Dec 28 06:14:10 CST 2025

Don’t relax!  It’s only your tension that’s holding you together.

Today is Boomtime, the 70th day of The Aftermath in the YOLD 3191

the dream archive / the pull season

** emologent

*** mood

Lately, I’m far less about survival and much more about making a difference. I think I’ve managed to overcome the short-term need and balanced out the long-term needs with enough time for me to do something to maintain our lifestyle. That really improves one’s mood. Not that I wouldn’t like to win the lottery, but that’s not a predictable thing. And some of that money could be used more effectively elsewhere. It’s still dark outside. Maybe it’s going to be foggy again. I don’t know. It happens a lot this time of year, apparently, more so than I remember in previous years. What I don’t know, and what my mood can’t sort out, is whether that missing memory is because I wasn’t paying attention, which I wasn’t, I was focused on everything else, or whether it’s just changing weather patterns. I know that I’ve thought about looking back at 600-year-old Cherokee weather records, and when I have, I’ve noticed that the weather is very much the same 500-600 years ago as it is now. I can’t reconcile that with global warming, but I’m sure there’s a reason why it’s that way. There’s something cyclical about the weather, probably related to orbits of planets and precession and that sort of thing. Anyway, my mood is decent.

*** energy

My energy is a little draggy this morning. I think maybe I wasn’t quite ready to get up, but no reason not to at this point. I did sort of binge on what I would call junk food the whole weekend. I think it’s time to stop. I don’t really like feeling this way again. I used to feel this way all the time, so much so that I didn’t even notice it. It became baseline and background. I don’t really want to go there again. I don’t want to go back up into the 280s, 290s, 300s, although I was only ever in the low 300s. But I just don’t want to do that again. And I would like to keep managing my blood sugar without any blood sugar medication. It seems to be working when I work at it. I just don’t always seem to be willing to work at it. But I can still lift a few things. I can still do some work. I can still raise a shed or paint a house or do other things like that. And I’m grateful for that. I need to make that last as long as I can.

*** mental wx

My mental weather is disappointingly clear. As a writer, I always like to wake up in a real mood because I can get some emotional traction out of that and write some things that have surprising epiphanies and interesting turns. A real banger of an essay, if you will. But nothing like that this morning. Just clear and disappointingly clear. I guess I shouldn’t complain.

*** actual wx

The actual weather really hasn’t revealed itself yet. Although I see dense fog as predicted, which is about what I see outside. Pitch black when it should be more sunny. At least more blue peeking through the clouds. 47% chance of rain overnight. That’s got to have been coming in for a while. Looks like just rain today, though. And then maybe next weekend. The temps are going to stay reasonable during the days. Really cold a couple of nights, like maybe Monday night and Tuesday night. But, hey, it’s decent. Really decent for winter.

*** loop

My loops have settled down. I guess I’ve kind of retired from my engineering doom predicting. I ran the numbers again, and they look much better than I thought. In order to maintain my lifestyle where it is now, I shouldn’t really have to do anything at all for somewhere between 8 and 11 months, which gives me time to get something going. And I’ve already got some things kind of picking up, so that’s good. I don’t need a whole lot every month to keep my lifestyle where I’d like it to be. I mean, everybody wants to be able to spend money without thinking about it, and everybody wants a new car every year and et cetera, but that’s probably not realistic in any sort of society because there are too many people and too many needs and too many things that need taking care of. So I’d like to do things that make a contribution that is rare and valuable enough for people to pay me in a rare and valuable way so that I can continue my lifestyle. It won’t be about providing things that they can give themselves. It will be about providing things that they either can’t give themselves or don’t want to give themselves, don’t want to take the time. So there’s that.

*** lingering

There’s always a lingering fear that I never really hit my stride, that I never did my best, that I never reached my full potential. There were many years where I took on roles. I discovered last night that that’s an autistic trait, although I don’t know if I could really be called autistic or not. I know I don’t think like everybody else. I don’t know if that’s called neurodivergent or just a less common subset of thinkers. I see psychologists all the time predicting things, but you have to remember that they have their own way of thinking, so anything they say about other ways of thinking is an estimation or a calculation. Anyway, not to go down that road too much.

*** unfinished

My library of unfinished things is exquisitely populated with all the materials and components and tools that I need to make things happen at any time. That in itself is a great comfort. That and the fact that I don’t have to rush to guerrilla market to force, to sell, to peddle in order to live reasonably comfortably. So I can take the time to do good work, maybe even get to excellent work eventually, and share it with people who want or need it at a reasonable price that will help me grow a little, but also help them get something that they wouldn’t ordinarily be able to find. That’s real joy.

*** gravity

There are times when I feel like Superman in a way, except that, of course, his flight abilities don’t make a whole lot of sense. Hovering in the air without doing anything to stay there, as if he could just stand on Earth or stand on a cloud, and it doesn’t matter because the gravity is so soft. But in fact, the gravity on the Moon would not allow you to indefinitely stay up in the air. You’d have to be in an orbit, and then you’d have a hard time figuring out how to come down. So I know that physics is not real. I know there’s suspension of disbelief. But with our heroes, we always want suspension of disbelief, right? I don’t know. Marvel’s giving DC a big run for its money, and those heroes are definitely imperfect. Go figure.

*** anchor

If there’s an anchor, it’s probably so embedded in my habits that I don’t notice it anymore. I went and bought a Galaxy Watch yesterday. Not a very expensive one. One that just syncs directly with my phone by Bluetooth. Or I think it can also probably get my Wi-Fi. But that doesn’t matter because I usually have my phone with me. I spent the usual few minutes trying to figure out if I could rearrange my whole life to only use the watch. I can’t. First of all, there’s not enough apps that suit me. Especially if there’s no real good note-taking app. Which, big surprise, it’s a watch. Hard to type, lots of talking, that sort of thing. But there are places where it fits into my life and helps me. Like alarms and timers and checking mail and doing a few things like that. Checking the weather, using a calculator. Those are all handy to have on your wrist so you don’t have to pull out your phone and hunt for the app. Deal with the inevitable keyboard issues. So it was a good idea. I don’t know how I managed to be drawn to the idea. I just sort of fell into it. I was bored at home, wanted to go to town. Went to town, picked up a few odds and ends at Home Depot for the house. When you’re still renovating a house, there are always a few odds and ends. And then I went to Big Box Electronics Store and walked straight to the watches. Found one that was in my price range. Got the skinny on it and bought it. Came home, tried to turn it into the One Ring and of course it resisted. And then over time I mellowed and decided this is a tool I need to add. To do things that are missing from my current setup. I like it. It’ll work.

*** resisting

So I guess the upshot of that last paragraph is I’m resisting change more than I used to. Not because I’ve had hardening of the attitudes in my old age, but because I’ve found some things that work consistently for me. And as long as they work consistently, it’s distracting to deal with those tools instead of to do things with them. Sometimes you mess with tools and sometimes you build. I spent my whole life messing with tools and sharing them with others and making a career out of it. And that’s great. But now I’d like to actually use the tools to do something productive and useful and beautiful and rare and valuable. That’s it, I guess.

*** idea pressure

I think the idea pressure for today is bringing the holiday time to an early close so that I can get started next week on my new year and really get started on my new life. Retirement means being the captain of your own ship, however small it might be. So there’s that. But also, I don’t want to keep doing the kinds of things I used to do. I think I’d like to get involved in an open source project, but I need to gen up more commitment, internal commitment, before I do. I’m still thinking about fooling around with hobbies and crafts. Nothing wrong with that.

*** creative current

Lately, my creative current is about blending exploration with productivity and good habits. I’m not sure exactly how to do that, because I tend to go overboard in one direction for a little while and then try to pull it back. It’s like trying to ride three horses to town. Ride it a little way, don’t let it get galloping, pull it back some, hobble it to a tree, go get the next horse, bring it up. It takes a long time to get to town that way. I think I need to find some better methods and better patterns.

*** pivot

Not a bad pivot for today would be actually reading the watch manual, which is online. The phone keeps nagging me to take a look at it, so maybe I should.

*** signal boost

I guess my biggest signal boost today would be responding to my hunger, which is already starting to complain, with something keto adjacent from my little shelf in the fridge. I started collecting all the things that I like to eat as part of my keto diet, which is how I’ve lost 53 pounds and how I’ve brought my blood sugar much lower without any medication, without any relevant medication. I’ve kind of gone off the wagon this Christmas season. Yeah, I kind of went way off the wagon. I kind of went over into the next county. But I can come back. It’s not impossible. I’ve already done it before, and I’ve got a history of commitment and achievement in that regard. It’s easier to get back into the groove. That’s another reason I need to bring this holiday season to a close today. Anyway, here’s to trying hard.

*** rare value

I’ve been completely blindsided by how well these blogs have taken off. I always thought you had to provide something lyrical, something Pulitzer-worthy, in order to get people to read. But in reality, you just kind of have to babble the truth into a page. I am trying to stay away from judgment. I guess I’m trying to just be normal. I don’t make a whole lot of judgments, unless people do things that are emotionally offensive or emotionally aggressive. I have a couple of those people in my life. I used to have more, but I dropped them. Not something I like, not something I like being around. It took a long time, but it’s turned out okay. I think I’ll stick to that process.

*** points of friction

There’s friction everywhere. Some of it’s self-induced, and some of it’s just natural. Sometimes things just aren’t ready to be done. Sometimes things are still ideas that have way too much low-level work behind them, and you’re still following the dream and not breaking it down into doable steps. I like David Allen’s idea of a project because it makes things much easier. You can go overboard finding individual steps, like turn your head to the left, reach over and grab the pencil, pick up the pencil. That’s a little silly. But there’s a lot you can do to break those things down into doable steps that make sense. The problem then, of course, is managing to do the steps in a community of people who relate to you and connect with you and want to spend time with you. That’s okay. It’s a good balance.

*** quest pulse

Still not sure if I have a grand quest. Always wanted to tell a grand argument story, but it’s so much work constructing the story that it seems like all the art and mystery is taken out of it. That doesn’t necessarily make a great story, unless you’re talking about absolute fantasy like Star Wars or Star Trek. Well, I don’t know, but I’m not sure where this quest wants to go yet.

*** todays ember

Today’s InnerFire is lit by light from fog-streaked windows, little task lamps all around the room, which are set to come on in a sequence, separated by a few minutes, to help get enough light in the room to help me get awake. Six o’clock seems like my natural waking time, so I might as well just collect everything around that. Today’s ember, I guess, is just moving forward in whatever direction forward seems to be at the moment.

*** what wants to live

My first instinct is to answer this prompt with, quote, truth, justice, and the American way, close quote. But I’m not a superhero. I think I’ve even left the cape in the closet for the last few years. Just didn’t want to put it on. And that’s fine. But I can hold on to the fact that I can do good work. I can do amazing things when I put my mind to it. I can get inside almost anybody’s head and understand a lot about how they think and behave, sort of work backwards into their motivations. That’s real empathy. There’s real value there. I can spin a yarn when I want to. I can create great prose and useful essays. Not necessarily get everybody to read them, but I can certainly write them. So there’s all that.

*** what can fall away

I think the falling away part might be a little bit more stark than what’s intended. In reality, there are things I can just let them float. Not many things I want to ditch anymore. I think I’ve thrown most of those away. But, you know, you don’t have to do everything every day or keep every hobby alive every week or write posts on every single website that you’ve ever owned, which I now own a few. Not sure exactly how that started, but there, there, may as well do something with that. But when I’m ready to, not in any kind of an urgent spin.