---
layout: post
title: "Sol 2"
date: 2026-01-05
---

So that basic problem?

Not structural. It’s me.

If you’ve read me, you know my mind. No wall between right and left brain, no wall between conscious and subconscious. Hard to control streams of consciousness, let alone impulse. Need willpower. Hard to come by.

First fix? Not leaning into the escape fantasy. Backstory is counterproductive and very sticky for my brain. I’ll get lost in playing the part. Not helpful.

Keeping it simple by declaring sewing, electronics, blogging, and non-fiction writing essential. Focus on real life, but keep the purpose and challenge. Just framework, not D&D.

Also note the terse, William-Gibson-style blogging. Easier to read. Much easier not to digress.

Time to get moving. No play-by-play, but not the greatest night. There’s that willpower problem again. With a brain like mine, the throttle is tricky on long runways. Need a shower, hot tea, and some self-motivation.

First two are easy. The third one? Gonna have to stop and read a bit. “The Willpower Instinct“ by Kelly McGonigal. Whatever it takes.

Good book? Worth spending the day? Well, I actually read the whole thing, and to be honest, she misses a bit of an opportunity. As I pondered what she said, I realized that there is another angle, buried in her science lesson. It's kinda an equation:

> 

Action Likelihood ~ Expected Value - (Prediction Cost + Future Effort)

Do the morning groom? Too much effort. Take two minutes to lay stuff out on the bathroom counter first? No resistance whatsoever. 

The Borg were wrong: resistance isn't futile, willpower is.  Explains so much, like why I have the overwhelming urge to over-prepare. It's not wrong to prepare, I just didn't understand how to prepare. 

Willpower,  it turns out, mostly means building the path — clearing brush, moving rocks, and sawing the occasional limb.  Tripping over my own feet is extra credit. 

So now I know clearly what Sol 2 is about, and precisely what to do today.  You? You'll have to come back tomorrow to find out.