---
layout: post
title: "Sol 3"
excerpt: "Just sit there and do something."
date: 2026-01-06
---

Yesterday, I kinda thought the problem was willpower. Bought the book “The Willpower Instinct” and read it cover to cover.  Learned a lot, though maybe not what the author wanted me to take away.  Willpower doesn’t really look like the problem; it seems more like a misunderstanding of how humans operate.

Willpower doesn't feel like a *natural* human response to anything. Seems like we move away from danger or toward what’s readily available, like a snake in the grass or a ripe apple within reach.

When I looked honestly at my setup, it was pretty clear the environment was quietly vetoing the 60-day challenge. My electronics tools were scattered across drawers and rooms. Every session required setup, teardown, and decision-making before any real work could begin.  In short, it was a slog with a high cost for beginning and a dreaded clean-up phase at the end. 

You might let your mind be fooled, but you can’t fool your heart.  If the housekeeping is bigger than the actual results, it’s no wonder we don’t do projects.

So yesterday became about making the workspace alive and available. I rebuilt the desk into a dual-purpose electronics bench and writing retreat, with tools visible, components labeled, and gear within reach. No ritual required to begin.[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!1_7t!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2F22acd6bd-603a-48bb-9d9c-edb27683033f_4000x3000.jpeg)

And this space doubles as my writing desk, since the Mac fits perfectly on the open workspace of the electronics mat.[](https://substackcdn.com/image/fetch/$s_!RCs-!,f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fsubstack-post-media.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Fb4a38ebc-6b35-4b2d-8e27-dd26f828667c_4000x3000.jpeg)

Nothing was built, but the progress made on the 60-day challenge was immense.  Now the room is no longer really asking me to be heroic, just encouraging me to sit down.

---

Man, a whole lot of my life makes better sense now.  Worth every minute.

But wait a minute?  What’s the stuff on top of the laptop in the first picture?  What does any of *that* have to do with this challenge?  Come back tomorrow and see.