My Credo
========

**Say what you mean**; because telepathy is still in beta testing.

| 

**Be choosy with your media**, because your brain thinks it's real.
Unless, of course, you're watching someone paint happy little trees.

| 

**Speak clearly, listen carefully, pay close attention**; otherwise,
you'll end up in a conversation about quantum physics when you just
asked for the time.

| 

**Do what you love**; life's too short not to ply your craft. Just don't
expect it to pay the bills, unless your craft is printing money.

| 

**Keep it simple**; complex plans involve running, and who's got the
energy for that?

| 

**Start small and build a little at a time**; a mosaic is more beautiful
than the finest concrete, and way less likely to get you sued for
improper construction.

| 

**Network**; because who else will laugh at your "I'm not a robot"
jokes?

| 

**Be who you are**; even a bent wire can carry a great light, especially
in a modern art exhibit.

| 

**Build for strength, not just speed**; the hare may have had more
Instagram followers, but the tortoise won the race.

| 

**Hack**; just remember, "try it and see" doesn't apply to skydiving or
lion taming.

| 

**Under-promise and over-deliver**; because everyone loves a surprise,
especially when it's not another birthday card.

| 

**Divide and conquer**; because life is essentially a giant game of
strategy board games.

| 

**Do one thing well**; remember, unicorns are famous for just one horn.

| 

**Use what you have**; unless it's a floppy disk, then maybe it's time
to upgrade.

| 

**Use levers, not people**; because people are terrible at being levers,
they keep asking for coffee breaks.

| 

**Release early, release often**; otherwise, you're just hoarding
half-baked ideas, and there's no market for those.

| 

**Distrust all claims for the one true way**; except for pizza, pizza is
always the answer.

| 

**Think ahead, but don’t worship your plans**; all things are possible,
except maybe skiing through a revolving door.

| 

**Think big: you are the universe**. And like any good universe,
remember to occasionally expand beyond your current dimensions — just
without the big bang.

| 

**Abhor violence in all its forms**, even contradicting others. Keep
your peace, hold your tongue, and avoid turning into a debate club
mascot.

| 

**Practice the Prime Directive**; unless you're in a sci-fi movie, then
totally ignore it.

| 
