media mindfulness: how what we see becomes a part of us
=======================================================

A favorite streaming series; social media; news sites: The stories,
pictures, and videos you take in seem harmless -- just passsing the
time. But if you search your feelings (Luke), you know these things
affect you: how you think and feel, and more importantly, how you make
decisions. Even if they seem unreal or ridiculous?

Media (movies, TV shows, video games, and social media) can be a huge
part of our lives. It's easy to spend hours every day staring passively
at screens, absorbing whatever comes into your mind. But here's the
thing: our brains are sponges. No, really, they actually are, basically,
and they soak up all that stuff, and it shapes our identity, thinking,
and beliefs.

The Power of Images and Stories
-------------------------------

Our brains react to sounds and images almost as if we having the
experience ourselves. Ever felt scared during a horror movie, or cheered
when Superman wins? Our brains can't always tell the difference between
what's real and what's CGI. These powerful feelings and reactions stay
with us long after the movie ends.

The more we see something, the more it becomes a part of us. If we watch
shows that are always full of violence, we might start to think the
world is a scarier place than it really is. If we constantly see
perfect-looking people on social media, we might start to feel bad about
ourselves, even though we know those pictures are often edited or
filtered.

How Media Shapes Our Beliefs
----------------------------

It's not just our emotions that are affected by what we watch—our
beliefs and values can be shaped by media, too. For example, if we
always see certain groups of people portrayed in negative ways, we might
start to believe those stereotypes, even if we know better. Or if we see
unrealistic images of beauty, we might begin to think that’s how
everyone should look.

Even when something seems silly or absurd, it can still have an impact.
Cartoons, for example, might exaggerate things for laughs, but they can
also send messages about how people should act or what’s considered
normal. Over time, these messages can become a part of our own thinking,
without us even realizing it.

Being Mindful of What We Watch
------------------------------

So, what can we do about it? The key is to be mindful of what we watch
and how much time we spend in front of screens. Being mindful means
paying attention to how media makes us feel and think. If something
makes us feel bad or seems unrealistic, it’s okay to step away or choose
something else.

It's also important to balance the media we consume. Watching different
types of shows, reading various kinds of books, and following a mix of
people on social media can help us see the world in a more balanced way.
We should choose content that makes us think, teaches us something new,
or simply makes us feel good.

Conclusion
----------

Media is a powerful tool that can shape who we are and how we see the
world. By being mindful of what we watch and how it affects us, we can
make better choices that help us grow in positive ways. Remember, just
because something is on a screen doesn’t mean it’s real—or that it
should become a part of who we are.
